While the later Warring States period saw some philosophers attempt broad syntheses of every previous thinker, some of the period's most important figures were narrow-minded officials whose reforms immediately transformed China and whose echoes continue to resound in today's political systems.

Lord Shang, also known as Gongsun Yang or Shang Yang, was the lord of the region of Yang within the Qin state. His ideas and policies were preserved in the *Book of Lord Shang*, which was collected in the century following his death. According to the *Book*, unlike the other officials of Qin, Lord Shang was happy to break with tradition and the ways of the sage-kings that previous thinkers appealed to. He realized that a new era, one of iron tools, mass infantry armies, and mounted cavalry troops, would be ruled by different means than the previous era of Bronze Age aristocracy. Lord Shang's system prioritized two things: agriculture and war. Trades and roles that did not contribute to these two things, like merchants and scholars, should be eliminated. If farming and war are not the two main ways of gaining wealth and prestige, why would people do them? Lord Shang put in place a system of law which treated all people, regardless of birth or position, with the same harshness; punished both light and heavy offenses with incredible brutality; and punished anyone complicit to a crime with the same intensity as the criminals. His system promoted officials from the ranks of soldiers based on the counts of enemy heads they brought back. Through reward and punishment, meted out directly by the state, every person is brought into alignment with the state's priorities.

Lord Shang was feared by other ministers, who managed to turn the ruler of Qin against him. Attempting to flee, Lord Shang suffered a brutal death at the hands of his own laws. Despite this apparent irony, Lord Shang's reforms were instrumental in the Qin state's later unification of China, and posed an enormous question to the thinkers whose philosophies would condemn such a system.