Han Feizi was a thinker from the royal family of Han. He is thought to have studied under Xunzi. Like Xunzi, Han Feizi stood near the end of the classical period of Chinese philosophy, and he attempted a grand synthesis of its ideas. But unlike Xunzi, who critiqued Shen Dao and feared the ideas of Lord Shang, Han Feizi saw Lord Shang, Shen Buhai, and Shen Dao as revealing the path to a system more powerful than anything the Confucians could imagine.

Han Feizi believes that self-cultivation is possible. Certain people cultivate themselves and become extremely virtuous, to the point of shaping society through their virtue. But most people will never achieve this or even try. Instead, a consistent law is what ensures order, even as more or less virtuous rulers come and go.

The ideal system will be invisible, as if part of nature: most people will live within it, responding to its incentives and disincentives, without noticing it. But some will notice. The "vermin," like the Confucians and Mohists, will critique it; but all these people do is burden society with their talk, all while their conflicting ideals confuse the ministers. They should be eliminated. Others, the "tigers and wolves", will see the system and play it to their own self-interest. If the ruler allows them to play him, they will take his place. To use their intelligence to his own ends, he must utilize nonaction (*wuwei*), keeping them in constant fear and uncertainty through emptiness and unexpresiveness. In this way, he can manipulate them with subtlety and utilize their ambition to run the state.

Han Feizi explained his ideas to the ruler of Qin, but a fellow student of Xunzi's, Li Si, feared his influence and had Han Feizi executed. This was largely interpreted as a proof of Han Feizi's point about tigers and wolves. Han Feizi's ideas contributed to the unification of China by the Qin state, and his philosophy provides a devastating (if one-sided) critique of the Hundred Schools period and the limits of self-cultivation.