No Chinese thinker was greater or more elusive than Kongzi, or Confucius (the Latin name given to him by the Jesuits). Confucius refused to set down his ideas himself. Much of what we know about him comes from the anecdotes and sayings in the Analects, which presents itself as a collection compiled by his followers. Yet Confucius set out the terms that everyone else would redefine over and over again in the following centuries.

Confucius was a traveling thinker in the Spring and Autumn Period. Unable or unwilling to take any official position, he became an independent teacher. Confucius' philosophy lies in the balancing of opposites, such as cultural refinement and peasant-like simplicity, as well as dutifulness to one's social role and flexible sympathetic understanding. To Confucius, goodness is spontaneous and situation-specific, but rooted in rituals that come from ancient tradition. While Confucius' notion of "ritual" is certainly derived from ancient traditions, it selectively endorses what it finds to be essential (see *Analects* 9.3), a contribution that Confucius refused to acknowledge as his own.

Confucius gives many examples and does not define his key terms clearly, and this is perhaps part of his elusive wisdom. Through this roundabout method, he refined many concepts from antiquity that would be heavily debated in the coming centuries. Confucius refused to let himself be called an innovator or a sage, but within a few centuries, Xunzi was calling him the greatest sage to have ever lived.